--
From:  mcvax!ux63.bath.ac.uk!ma_jap@seismo.CSS.GOV
Subject:  delft minutes
To:  eulisp <mcvax!cwi.nl!eulisp@seismo.CSS.GOV>
Received:  from bath63 by hlh.co.uk; Wed, 14 Jan 87 16:50:23 gmt
Message-Id:  <11111.8701141650@hlh.co.uk>
Date:  Wed, 14 Jan 87 16:50:23 gmt
Mmdf-Warning:   Parse error in original version of preceding line at Ukc.AC.UK

.sc
.ps 14
.vs 16
.ce
\fBMinutes of EuLISP-XIV, Delft, 870105\fP
.ps 10
.vs 12

\fBAttendees\fP\*[1\*]
.(f
\*[1\*]Secretary's Note: The general lack of funding available to the
participants, combined with the rail strike in France, severely
affected the number of people able to attend.  It was therefore
decided to curtail the meeting to one day.
.)f

.nf
Je\*'ro\*↑me Chailloux, INRIA, Paris (JC)
Jan van Katwijk, University of Technology, Delft (JvK)
Timm Krumnack, Krupps-Atlas Elektronik, Bremen (TK)
Julian Padget, University of Bath (JAP)
Willem van der Poel, University of Technology, Delft (WvdP)

\fBAgenda\fP

1.	Minutes of Eulisp-XIII (Paris)
2.	Report on X3J13 meeting in Dallas
3.	Funding
4.	Future meetings
5.	Status of national standards efforts
6.	Timescales/Objectives
.fi

.fi
.ce
\fIMinutes of Eulisp-XIII\fP

JC had not received these despite their having been circulated on
the eulisp mailing list.  JAP reported that he had got feedback from
several people on the December minutes, including Dick Gabriel, Mario
Furnari and Roland Rehmnert.

.ce
\fIReport on X3J13 in Dallas\fP

Two supportng documents were received: the proposed X3J13 charter and
the minutes of the Dallas meeting.  X3J13 has identified a number of
task groups and set up some of those task groups.  It was noted that
amongst the unconstituted groups was the one for ISO interaction.

The various officers of X3J13 were noted: Chairman - Bob Mathis,
Vice-Chairman - Guy Steele, International representative - Dick
Gabriel, Secretary - Mary van Deusen, Vocabulary: Bill Scherlis,
Editors: Dick Gabriel and Will Clinger.

The next meeting of X3J13 will take place in Palo Alto over 17-19
March.

.ce
\fIFunding\fP

JC reported that the EEC has given approval for suppport to this
standardisation activity and that INRIA will act as banker.  However
the official announcement has not yet been received by INRIA and no
support can be given until this has happened.  The mechanism should
certainly be in place by the March meeting.

.ce
\fIFuture Meetings\fP

In view of the cost of attending meetings (although this may be
ameliorated to a certain extent soon) and, more importantly the need
for more time to work in between meetings, it was proposed that EuLISP
should move to a two month cycle starting immediately.  Therefore, the
next meeting of EuLISP will be in March.  In the previous minutes it
had been proposed to hold the March meeting in Italy.  It was agreed
that we should continue with the same schedule of locations and
therefore the next meeting will be held in Paris at IRCAM for 2 days
on March 2\*[nd\*]/3\*[rd\*]

.ce
\fIStatus of national standards efforts\fP

JAP reported that the last meeting of BSI/IST/5 (Programming
Languages) had agreed to the formation of a LISP panel.  JAP has been
nominated as the convenor.

.ce
\fITimescales/Objectives\fP

There was a long discussion about the need and subsequently the
strategy for building trial implemenations of the different levels of
the EuLISP proposal.  There appear to be two options:
.ip (i)
define in Common LISP, using the package system to obtain the
necessary security/visibility to make the scheme work.  This would be
good because it may be relatively portable and also it would make the
results easily accessible to industry.  It is also rather hard because
of the difficulty of producing a compiler in such an environment.
.ip (ii)
define in Scheme.  The type system is not a fundamental mechanism and
could be built on top of Scheme.  Again there are attractions because
of the portability of Scheme code and the relatively wide availability
of Scheme implementations.  Scheme also has the sound semantic base
that the EuLISP proposal requires rather than having to construct it
as would be necessary in a CL based system.  The detraction from using
Scheme is the subsequent accessibility of the system to industry where
the only major user of Scheme is Texas Instruments.
.lp
The consensus was that it should be possible to prototype most of the
EuLISP ideas in about a year given the appropriate environment and
resources.
.pp
To make progress on the above matter a much more detailed definition
of the language levels is necessary.  To this end it was agreed that
Christian Queinnec, Herbert Stoyan and JAP will work on such a
document with the intention of having a significant strawman
completed in time for the March meeting.

.ce
\fIFINIS - 1730\fP

.ce
\fIOutstanding Action Items\fP

Christian Queinnec will add macro expansion to the level0 interpreter

JAP will describe the interpreter outlined at the December meeting in
more detail

JAP to mail Clinger on LISP/VM macro expansion strategy

.ce
\fINew Action Items\fP

Herbert Stoyan, Christian Queinnec and JAP to collaborate on producing
a defining document for level0/1 for the March meeting.






padget@RAND-UNIX/su
Delft Meeting

I read the minutes, and I think there is an important factual error.
The ``editors'' group is the ISO interaction group. That is, the ISO
delegation is intended to be Mathis, Clinger, and I; Clinger and I are
the nominated people for the ISO project editor position. Aside from
the object-oriented programming specification, which I am helping to write,
Clinger and I are not involved in any ANSI Common Lisp work, only ISO work
(moving Common Lisp in the proper direction).

So I believe the statement that the ISO interaction group is unconstituted
is incorrect.
			-rpg-

--
From:  mcvax!ux63.bath.ac.uk!uucp@seismo.CSS.GOV
To:  eulisp <inria!eulisp@seismo.CSS.GOV>,
Date:         7 May 1987 20:02:33 BST
Received:  from ux63.bath.ac.uk by kestrel.Ukc.AC.UK   via Janet (UKC CAMEL FTP)
Message-Id:  <8705071913.AA28442@inria.inria.fr>
Subject: (no subject)

Received: from m42.maths.bath.ac.uk (m42) by bond.maths.bath.ac.uk; Thu, 7 May 87 18:56:41 BST
From: Julian Padget <jap@uk.ac.bath.maths>
Date: Thu, 7 May 87 18:51:22 BST
Message-Id: <15198.8705071751@m42.maths.bath.ac.uk>
To: eulisp@uk.ac.bath.maths
Subject: Bruxelles minutes
Cc: chenetier@uucp.inria

.ce
.ps 12
\f3Minutes EuLisp XIV Brussels 870408\f1
.ps 10



.EQ
delim @@
.EN
.nh
.tr ~
.IP "\f3Present\f1" 1i
J~Chailloux~(INRIA), J~H~Davenport~(Bath),
T~Krumnack~(Krupp~Atlas~Elektronik), W~van~der~Poel~(Delft),
H~Stoyan~(Konstanz), D~Nardi~(Rome), P~Coint (Xerox\(hyParis),
E~Neidl~(CGE),
.nh
T~Bub~(Danet), J~F~Omnes~(EEC), J~Dalton (Edinburgh), C~Queinnec~(LITP).

.LP
J~Chailloux took the chair.  J~H~Davenport took minutes in
the absence of C~Queinnec.

.IP "\f3Next Meeting\f1" 1i
.sp -1
It was decided to hold a two-day meeting in early June.  After a
consideration of dates, it was decided to hold a meeting \f311-12 June\f1
(just before parallel machines and object-oriented programming
conferences).  The obvious alternatives were Brussels and Paris: a vote
was held, with the result being \f3Brussels\f1.  H Stoyan will only
attend 870612.

.nh
.IP "\f3Funding\f1" 1i
.sp -1
J~Chailloux raised the question of funding.  He understood that the EEC
would only fund 12 participants, whereas the EuLisp mailing list was about
40, and he had heard complaints from those not invited.  J~F~Omnes said
that more could be funded (though obviously not vast teams) \(em it
appeared that there had been a misunderstanding.  W~van~der~Poel asked if
one could send a substitute: J~F~Omnes saw no problem.  The EEC will
only \f3fund\f1 people from EEC countries, though others may \f3attend\f1
(they will need a telex of invitation as well).

.LP
\f3Approval of Minutes of Delft\f1

None had been circulated.

\f3Report X3J13 meeting Palo Alto.  3rd meeting 16-18~March~1987 by
J~Chailloux.\f1

70 people present.  At previous meeting they had decided to form many
sub-committees.  These reported, but many decisions will be taken later.

\f3Cleanup SubCommittee\f1.  This has done a lot of work on cleaning up
the book, but there is a lot to do.  A special form has been designed for
making changes to the book.  Four trivial amendments have been agreed, but
most decisions will be taken later.  It had been agreed that ANSI CL would
have a functional object, described by J~Chailloux as "like SCHEME's, but
fuzzier".  This involves changes to apply, funcall and functionp.  The
book will be rewritten by a DEC employee, but the copyright will rest with
ANSI.  The concept of Level 1/Level 2 is still in the air, but ANSI CL
will definitely be Level 2.

\f3CL Object System SubCommittee\f1.  This has prepared a revised draft
(which J~Chailloux has), which is certainly better.  But
Bobrow/Gabriel/Moon still do not agree on multiple inheritance.

\f3Validation SubCommittee\f1.  Nothing has really been done.  Xerox have
bought a validation suite from Lucid.  How does one validate an undefined
object?

[C Queinnec arrived]

McCarthy was there, and was strongly against the standardisation of "LISP"
as a word.  ANSI will call theirs ANSI-LISP.  W~van~der~Poel supported this
view, and the group re-affirmed its decision to call its result "ISO
LISP".

[J Dalton arrived]

The SC-22 plenary meeting in Washington in October 87 should create the
ISO LISP working group.  Nations then have 2 or 3 months to nominate
members, so the first meeting cannot take place until early 1988.  It
appears that ANSI will choose Gabriel and Klinger.

Fahlmann apparently says that, if the "macro problem" is solved, then he
would be prepared to accept a single value/function space.

The next X3J13 meeting will be in Boston, June 30/July 1.  J~Chailloux
estimated that ANSI LISP would take two years: J~Dalton thought that was
optimistic.

\f3General discussion\f1
.nh

The discussion became general: "is ISO-LISP a creative or a normative
process".  C~Queinnec thought that we were combining existing features in
a new way.

J~Chailloux said that he thought that we needed an implementation to prove
our importance in face of ANSI LISP.  This provoked a lively debate.
People distinguished between "toy implementations", eg in SCHEME or COMMON
LISP.  D~Neidl called for at least a macro implementation of Level 0, for
experimental purposes.  H Stoyan doubted that implementations were either
necessary or sufficient, and stated that he would not be working on
implementations.

C~Queinnec felt that implementations served two distinct purposes:

.IP 1)
verifying the consistency of the definition.
.IP 2)
verifying that efficient implementations exist.

.LP
J~Chailloux felt that we needed a real vehicle, not just a toy built on
SCHEME, and asked who was working on one.  J~H~Davenport asked whether the
definition was sufficiently precise.

The discussion was inconclusive on the point of implementation, but agreed
that more documentation, and more precise documentation, on EuLisp were
required. The question was raised about formatting systems, and it was
decided that LaTeX was the best vehicle.  Not everyone has LaTeX, and the
group was reminded of the need for circulating documents in a directly
human-readable form.

In the afternoon, C~Queinnec introduced two documents:

.IP
Denotational Semantics for LISP
.nf
Genericity and Types.
.LP
.fi

The first is, essentially, a "pretty print" of an actual LISP program
(nevertheless, several typographic errors were found).

The first remark made was that this document described things in terms of
a concrete syntax, not an abstract syntax.  W~van~der~Poel drew
attention to a preprint of his on "Constructing @lambda@\f1-expressions in the
@lambda@\f1-calculus", and offered to send it round.

A long debate ensued on the semantics of alternative.  It was decided to
modify this to accept only three arguments, ie only (IF A B C).
.bp
It was also pointed out that there was no way of changing topenv at the
moment: this would be remedied.

It was noticed that EuLisp prohibited

.IP
(setq a b)
.nf
(defconst a b)

.fi
.LP
unlike common lisp.  The reason was that a piece of code compiled after
(setq~a~b) would become invalidated by the (defconst a b).

It was observed that constant-assignment defines a binding to be
immutable, but does \f3not\f1 guarantee that the value will not be changed
by rplac etc.  This provoked a lively discussion.  It was decided not to
change matters for the time being.

.nh
It was agreed that C~Queinnec would circulate the revised version of the
semantics, and the underlying Lisp code, to EuLisp.  It was also requested
that a physical copy be sent to all attendees at this meeting.

The general question of physical distribution of material to the group was
raised.  Given the number of US participants, and the thickness of some of
the X3J13 documents, the exercise is expensive.  It was agreed:

.IP 1)
to ask J~F~Omnes if the EEC could organise the distribution
.IP 2)
that J~Chailloux would append a \f3list\f1 of his papers to these minutes,
which could be requested from him.

.LP



"mcvax!inria!chaillou"@seismo.CSS.GOV/su
EuLisp Meeting

Hm, I thought the meeting was to have been June 18, 19, and I
had planned my trip accordingly. Lynne's birthday is June 11,
so if I change my plans, I run the risk of disappointment on
her part. I will see what can be done.

On the other hand, it appears I would need to be invited (via telex) to
attend. Given that I have not been so invited, perhaps I should simply
attend ECOOP.

Nevertheless, I will be in Paris for ECOOP and the OOP workshop
June 18. Is it still true that I can stay with you? I currently
am scheduled to arrive June 13. Will you be back in Paris by then?

On the minutes, Moon/Bobrow/Gabriel disagree on some aspects of
multiple inheritance, not on multiple inheritance in general.

Lucid is providing a service of making sure that Xerox Common Lisp passes
the test suite that Lucid uses for its internal testing, which means that
the two Lisps are roughly compatible. This is different from a validation
suite. I suppose this is an example of what happens when people speculate
about undisclosed business relationships, but it also has a little bad
rhetoric about it.

For the record, Clinger's name is ``Clinger'' not ``Klinger.''

I hope all is well with you. My daughter, Mariko Gabrielle Toribara,
and her mother are well.

			-rpg-

--
From:  mcvax!maths.bath.ac.uk!jap@uunet.UU.NET
Sender:  mcvax!maths.bath.ac.uk!jap@uunet.UU.NET
Date:  Tue, 19 Jan 88 13:24:26 GMT
Subject:  corrected minutes (spelling mistakes)
To:  inria!eulisp@uunet.UU.NET
Received:  from watt by mordell.maths.bath.AC.UK id aa14481; 19 Jan 88 13:24 GMT
Message-Id:  <8801191422.AA24298@inria.inria.fr>

.sc
.ps 14
.vs 16
.ce
\fBMinutes of EuLISP-XVIII, Bruxelles, 871125-26\fP
.ps 10
.vs 12

\fBAttendees\fP\

.nf
Mariarosario Boscotrecase, Delphi Systems, Pisa (MB)
Je\*'ro\*↑me Chailloux, INRIA/ILOG S.A., Paris (JC)
Thomas Christaller, GMD, St Augustin (TC)
Pierre Cointe, Rank-Xerox, Paris (PC)
Roland Ducournau, Sema-Matra, Paris (RD)
Orri Erling, Entity Systems, Helsinki, (OE)
John ffitch, University of Bath (JPff)
Jan van Katwijk, Universiteit Delft (JvK)
Arno Klassen, Delft University (AK)
Dieter Kolb, Siemens, Mu\*:nchen (DK)
Timm Krumnack, Krupp-Atlas Elektronik, Bremen (TK)
Pattie Maes, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (PM)
Kris van Marcke, Vrije Universtiteit Brussel (KvM)
Silvia Mazzini, Delphi Systems, Pisa (SM)
Eugen Neidl, ILOG S.A., Paris (EN)
Francois Neumann, Thomson CSF, Paris (FN)
Greg Nuyens, ILOG S.A., Paris (GN)
Jean Omnes, EEC, Bruxelles (JO)
Julian Padget, University of Bath (JAP)
Pierre Parquier, Bull S.A., Paris (PP)
Willem van der Poel, Universiteit Delft (WvdP)
Christian Queinnec, Universite\*' Paris VI, (CQ)
Jean-Pierre Regourd, CGE Laboratoires de Marcoussis (JPR)
Herbert Stoyan, Universita\*:t Konstanz (HS)
Richard Tobin, University of Edinburgh, (RT)
Christoph Wedi, GMD, St Augustin (CW)
.fi

\fBAgenda\fP

1.	National standardisation processes
	A.	report on November X3J13 meeting
	B.	IWoLES
	C.	WG-16 meeting in February
2.	Evaluation and status of European progress towards ISO Lisp
3.	Technical issues (packages/modules, types, objects, macros, 
	declaration/scope, CLOS, character sets)
4.	Future meetings

.sh 1 "National Standardisation Progress"

.sh 2 "Report on November X3J13 meeting"

GN gave a oral report on the X3J13 meeting in Fort Collins (16-18
November) at which he, JC and JP were present.  He reported that X3J13
are revising their charter and considering an accelerated work
schedule in order to produce a draft standard within 1 year.  The next
meeting of X3J13 will be a week long to permit some of the technical
sub-committees to report and then revise in the light of comments
received within the period of the meeting.  The next X3J13 meeting
will be held in Palo Alto, March 14-18, 1988.  The CLOS sub-committee
are meeting in Boston in December.  GN also reported that matters seems
to be moving fairly slowly within X3J13, which could in part, be a
consequence of the goal moving.

.sh 2 "International Workshop on Lisp Evolution and Standardisation"

CQ announced the 1st IWoLES meeting which will take place in Paris on
21-23 February, a few days before the first meeting of ISO WG-16.  The
definitive call for participation will be complete shortly.

.sh 2 "First meeting of ISO WG16 (Lisp)"

The first meeting of ISO WG-16 will take place in Paris under the
auspices of AFNOR on February 24-25, 1988.  CQ reported that he has
been notified who will be the national representatives for the
Netherlands and for Denmark (N.B. CQ will ensure that the Danish
representative also receives an invitation to the next Eulisp
meeting), but has yet to hear from the rest of the countries who
stated they wished to participate and had resources in their NWI
returns.  Each country is permitted two representatives and 1-2
observers.  France will decide next week.  It is likely that the US
will send Gabriel, Clinger and Mathis.  The UK will decide at the next
meeting of IST/5 on December 15th.

CQ presented a preliminary agenda for WG-16:
.ip 1
organisation and voting policy
.ip 2
the name of the standard (ref ANSI comments on NWI)
.ip 3
remarks on the ballot
.ip 4
method of standardisation (e.g. formal semantics, informal definition
like CLtl)
.ip 5
work plan
.lp
The agenda (work schedule) for the WG must be fixed by the end of
1988.

The second ISO WG-16 meeting will probably be in Snowbird at the Lisp
Conference.

.sh 1 "Evaluation and status of European progress towards ISO Lisp"

JC distributed the letter written by JC, GN, CQ and JP before the Fort
Collins meeting which has been sent to a limited number of people on
X3J13 (Gabriel, Clinger, Mathis, Steele, Fahlman, Masinter).  JC
stressed that it was his belief that there is a danger of a loss of
commercial credibility for Lisp if a draft standard was not ready by
the end of 1988.

HS pointed out that this suggested wholesale adoption of Common Lisp
and that the letter invited that conclusion.

GN summarised the spectrum reactions he was expecting to the letter as
(i) no interest (ii) ANSI standardisation first, ISO later (iii) drop
ANSI work, start ISO.  The unanimous reaction was (ii).  GN described
the purpose of the letter to be to make progress on commonly
understood issues such as function type (CL cleanup strict
redefinition) and DYNAMIC-LET.  It was apparent that there was no
common ground on modules.  The lack of common ground could arise
from one of two possibilities: a lack of comprehension of the
problem or a desire to take packages as a starting point.  This group
is inclined to start afresh.  GN also noted that individuals in the
X3J13 group have different opinions from the committee as a whole.

JC again stated his belief in a need for an ISO standard for Lisp now,
with the Eulisp work being a basis for an ISO standard for the 1990's.

Various people remarked that there had been vigorous debate within
their companies about whether projects should be done in Lisp or C and
that the doubt surrounding the standardisation of Lisp often counted
against it.  CQ pointed out that there has been a marked rise in the
number of expert system shells available written in C.  DK referred to
the need for portability in applications.  HS summarised that there
can be no definitive conclusion to the Lisp versus C debate unless
someone makes a move to standardise.

Returning to the issue of timescale raised by JC, HS reminded the
meeting that part of the point of the Eulisp 3 level structure was to
permit us to define level-0 in one year.  On other hand the letter
sent to selected members of X3J13 suggests something much close to a
Common Lisp cleanup and takes Eulisp almost into the CL camp.
Following such a route will very likely preclude for ever the
development of a standard like that originally envisaged by the Eulisp
committee.  HS pointed out further that rather than putting effort
into the basis the letter is emphasising putting effort into
peripheral issues.

TC viewed the letter as stating a form of compromise, consistent with
the spirit of ISO work, and queried whether the letter was really so
supportive of CL as HS had interpreted it.

JP stated that his view was that the letter expressed a relationship
between CL and level-1 of Eulisp.  He personally objected to the list
of special forms given on page 2, PROGV and MULTIPLE-VALUE-PROG1 in
particular.

There followed a general discussion on short and long term objectives
which is summarised as follows.

.ip Q1
Where does the Eulisp proposal to ISO start?  Five options were
discussed: from scratch, ANSI, CL (as defined in CLtl), Scheme and
Eulisp (as proposed in the 1986 paper and developed since then).  The
first four alternatives require work on Eulisp to stop.  The last
option demands that the levels are fully specified, in particular the
gap between level-1 and level-2 needs filling in, and that some
implementations be developed.  The following motion was approved:
.(b
The Eulisp committee will propose to ISO WG-16 a 3 level standard
comprising: level-0,1 based on the Eulisp efforts to date and level-2
which is the extension of level-0,1 to be as close to ANSI Common Lisp
as possible.

We note that consistency between level-0, level-1 and level-2 is more
important than individual technical issues.
.)b

.ip Q2
Time scale of first ISO proposal?  Short term suggests something
within about one year.  However JvK pointed out that it is important
\fInot\fP to be specific about how long this will take because this
can lead to rushed decisions.  Long term will correspond to the more
sedate pace of the majority of ISO processes, that is about five to
six years.

.ip Q3
What are the rules for ISO WG-16?  There was a general discussion
about what topics are important to the Eulisp community, which
countries are likely to attend WG-16 (France, United Kingdom,
Netherlands, West Germany, Finland, Canada, Denmark, South Korea,
United States, Japan), how the interests of Eulisp can be represented
at ISO and the relationship of the Eulisp proposal to the statement in
the NWI.

.sh 1 "Technical Issues"

.sh 2 Objects

JC reported on the state of CLOS as of the Fort Collins meeting of
X3J13 where Gregor Kiczales gave a presentation.  There are four new
items in CLOS now:
.ip 1
Keyword parameters in method lambda lists
.ip 2
Initialisation protocol
.ip 3
Change in \fIwith-slots\fP (local binding of slot-names)
.ip 4
New functions \fIgeneric-flet\fP and \fIgeneric-labels\fP which have
the same status as \fIflet\fP and \fIlabels\fP).

PC and RD went to the last CLOS meeting (held during OOPSLA-87) and
talked about CQ's types and genericity proposal, RD's analysis of
multiple inheritance and PC's ObjVLisp/meta-object protocol work.

PC also reported on HP's experiments in CommonObjects on metaclass
management and analysis of the number of arguments used in
discrimination.  Apparently no examples were found which used more
than two arguments.

PC is discussing ObjVLisp with Kiczales with a view to encouraging
minimalism.  The minimal architecture for CLOS contains
standard-object (which is a subtype of T - the only relationship
between the object system and CL's type mechanism - and is a member of
standard-class) and standard-class (which is a member of itself and a
subtype of standard-object).  Standard-class contains information
about supers, subs, prototype, slots, all-slots, methods and SOMETHING
ELSE I HAVE FORGOTTEN).

The minimal architecture for ObjVLisp simply contains class, which is
a member of itself and contains information about supers, methods and
instance variables.  However, this forms a basis for describing CLOS.

PC and CQ will work on types and genericity to make sure that the type
system works with the object system in Eulisp.

MB gave a presentation of the work at Delphi on the implementation of
CLOS using the ObjVLisp model.  Under this scheme, standardmetaclass
is an instance of class and standardobject is an instance of
standardmetclass and both inherit from class.  

Dk asked about the current state of integration between CLOS and CL.
JC's impression was that it is not progressing.

The meeting adjourned until 0900 on 871126.

.sh 2 "Types & Genericity"

CQ presented the latest version of the types and genericity proposal.
It is addressing the issues of the management of common behaviours and
representation of structures.  The full details of the proposal are
given in Eulisp-87-004.  The philosophy of the mechanism is primarily
simplicity, there being three type constructors (cartesian product,
bounded repetition and sequence).  Other features are expressiveness:
capable of precise and exportable representation; disjointness: every
object has an unique type; minimality: sufficient to mimic CL; no type
hierachy: see generics; type TYPE: immutable, indefinite extent;
anonymous and inquireable: types are values.

New to the scheme is the operation of dynamic-extent-allocation.  This
idea will need quite a lot more work to uncover all the implications.
An obvious restriction that this imposes is the use of range checking
type schema.

.sh 2 "Packages/Modules"

DK reported on the difficulties being experienced in trying to write
applications using packages at Siemens.  The hardest problem for
beginners is name-conflict and the use of \fIshadow\fP, \fIunintern\fP
and \fIshadowing-import\fP.  He showed various tricky examples to
illustrate the problem.  He summarised with some recommendations for
packages which would improve matters in the cases they had considered:
shadow and shadowing-import should be removed and use only fully
qualified names or when using imported packages, name conflicts should
signal an error rather than silently interning somewhere else.

Another deficiency with the package system was the lack of an
operation to map over all the internal symbols (currently there exist
do-exported-symbols and do-symbols).

The style of application development at Siemens means that different
people are working on different modules within an application.  At
some point it is necessary to glue these modules (packages) together
into one, but there are two problems: firstly, there may be name
conflicts across the packages and secondly, exporting names from
package-1 to package-2 does not make the names in package-1 visible in
package-3 which is imports package-2 (that is, export is not
transitive).  As a result he proposed two new package functions:

.ce
(transmit-package packages &optional package)

and

.ce
(untransmit-package packages &optional package)

A package structure will now need a transmit list (which is the
composition of export with do-exported-symbols).  It was noted that
adding an exported symbol to a transmitted package will cause it to be
seen in the using package.

.sh 2 Character Sets

GN reported on the discussion on character sets at X3J13.  There is
some debate as to where multi-octet character sets fit in a language.
There is some work already in hand at the ISO level on this problem
(note that there is already an ISO approved character encoding scheme
for all the latin languages) and Thad Holka who is leading this work
is an invited speaker at IWoLES in February.  Another open question is
how multi-octet character sets fit into a type system.  Apparently
X3J3 (FORTRAN) is also concerned about this issue.

GN volunteered to find out more about the ISO draft standard on
character sets.

JC will circulate ISO standard on latin character sets.

.sh 2 Macros

JP talked about his initial investigation into macros and whether
there really is an issue here or not.  JP is also on the X3J13 macro
subcommittee.  There seems to be a fairly widely held belief that
there is a macro problem (because of the yet further inconsistencies
between interpreted and compiled code which can be introduced by
macros) but little consensus on what the problem actually is.

JP worked with Mark Wegman (IBM Yorktown - also X3J13 macro
subcommittee) over the summer started by trying to classify macro
usage and by trying out two mechanisms which have claimed to "solve"
the macro problem (Bawden's scheme publicised on the scheme-request
mailing list and Kohlbecker's scheme published in the Proceedings of
the 1986 Lisp Conference).  Both of these mechanisms resolve the
problem of inadvertent free variable capture.

Some issues in macro expansion lie in the dependencies within a macro
body, which come in two forms: structural - depend on the form of the
argument and environmental - depend on information available in
variable bindings extant at the moment of expansion.  Procedure
integration offers a solution to some of these problems as well as
having the advantage of removing the need to retain a consistent
function and macro definition of the same operator.

JPff pointed out that a deficiency in defining macro expansion to
take place in a null environment is if one wishes to profile the
macro, such as by counting the number of expansions or the number of
executions.  GN remarked that these data could be provided by
alternative means and were not necessarily the direct concern of the
macro writer.

WvdP offered to give a talk at the next meeting on some work on alpha
conversion that has been done at Delft University.	

.sh 2 Declaration/Scope

DK discussed a mail item he sent out recently talking about the
pervasiveness of special declarations and the resolution of free
variable bindings in CL.  He gave the following example:
.nf

(defun foo (x)
  (let ((y 3))
       (declare (special y))
       (fum x)))

(defun fum (x) (+ x y z))

(setq y 1)

(setq z 2)

(foo 5) -> 10

.fi
That is, although CL is a more lexical dialect of Lisp than some
before it, some arcana has been retained.  If CL is lexically scoped
then (foo 5) should deliver 8 by default.  The problem lies in the
absence of a special declaration at the reference site of the
variable.  This is not necessary according to CLtl but thus engenders
the behaviour above.  The Siemens group have come out in favour of the
notation put forward in Eulisp, namely the dynamic-let construct, in
conjunction with which they would like accessors: global-ref,
dynamic-ref, lexical-ref and constant-ref.  They also referred to the
problem of multi-processing and shallow versus deep binding which has
not been addressed at all in CLtl.

.sh 1 "Future Meetings"

It was agreed to hold the next meeting in Brussels on 3rd/4th February
starting at 1000.  Papers for distribution for the next meeting must
be with Odile Chenetier (chenetier@inria.inria.fr) at least one week
before the meeting.  Address for physical mail:
.nf
.(b
Odile Chenetier
ILOG
2 Avenue Gallieni
94250 Gentilly

Tel: +33(1)46-63-66-66
.)b
.fi

The meeting closed at 1630.

.sh 1 "Documents"

.ip Eulisp-87-004
Types and Genericity for Schisp.

--
From:  Jeff Dalton <mcvax!aiva.ed.ac.uk!jeff@uunet.UU.NET>
Subject:  Comments on Nov 87 meeting
To:  inria!inria.inria.fr!eulisp@uunet.UU.NET
Message-Id:  <18890.8801211532@aiva.ed.ac.uk>
Date:  Thu, 21 Jan 88 15:32:22 gmt
Received:  from aiva.ed.ac.uk by kestrel.Ukc.AC.UK   via Janet (UKC CAMEL FTP)

I haven't seen much EuLisp mail for some time, but Julian's recent
posting (the revised minutes) reminded me that it could be done.

1. Declaration / Scope

	(defun foo (x)
	  (let ((y 3))
	    (declare (special y))
	    (fum x)))

	(defun fum (x) (+ x y z))

I have heard some confusing accounts of this example.  There seems to
be a suspicion that the SPECIAL declaration in FOO somehow affects Y
in FUM as well.  However, Y and Z in FUM are special regardless of any
declarations because they refer to global variables, and global variables
in Common Lisp are special.

However, here is the same example in T, a Scheme dialect that implements
a DYNAMIC-LET, called simply BIND:

	> (define (foo x)
	    (bind ((y 3))
	      (fum x)))
	#{Procedure 1 FOO}
	> (define (fum x) (+ x y z))
	#{Procedure 2 FUM}
	> (lset y 1)
	1
	> (lset z 2)
	2
	> (foo 5)
	10

BIND operates by making temporary assignments to locations, in this
case the global (modulo locales) variable Y.

The result is the same as in Common Lisp.  So, I don't think this
particular example shows that Common Lisp is all that strange.  Still,
the T approach is simpler, and it should be possible to find an
example that shows it (CLtL, p. 158?).  The nice thing is that T
doesn't have to say that global variables are special.

I am not in favor of having to say (FLUID Y) whenever I want to
refer to a dynamic binding.  I prefer the T approach.  I find it
simple and clear enough and easier to read and write.

2. Types and Genericity

I'm not sure I understand this.  It appears to specify representations
exactly and to be rather like structures in, say, C.  There doesn't seem
to be any room for type information so that I can determine the type of
an object at run-time.  Suppose I have an object of type (type-power 1
char-type).  Suppose I apply numberp to this object.  How is numberp
able to see if it's a number of not?  (Another way to ask this: how
are generic functions able to find out the type?  If they can, it seems
that there's more to the representation than has been specified.)

What does it mean to say there is no type hierarchy?  Are fixnums and
flonums not both numbers or is number not a type?  Presumably number is
not a type and numberp is a generic function but not a "type predicate".
Is that so?

I do not find dynamic-extent allocation very Lisp-like and am worried
the giving it so prominent a role will require a lot of work rather
late in the day (with respect to standardization).

3. Modules

I would like to hear more about what's being discussed.  The Fort
Collins letter said:

     Modules (as the term is used in other programming languages,
     referring to freezing the behavior and access to code and
     data) are necessary to guarantee the correct behavior of
     valid programs.

I see two separate issues here.  One is the freezing of access.
Modules are a natural unit on which to freeze access, but freezing
access is not a necessary property of modules.  (Other languages
tend to freeze access anyway -- you have to rewrite and recompile
to change it -- and so have frozen modules too, but it's not modules
that add the freezing.  Pascal is frozen, not just Modula-II.)

The other issue is what modules should be.  I see advantages to
environment-based modules, as in T's locales and MIT Scheme, over
reader-based schemes such as CL packages, but we will have to see
whether these ideas are ready to be standardized.

By the way, Common Lisp already has something like modules that
freeze access to code and data.  CL supports a style like this:

	(let ((var expr) ...)		;local variables
	  (labels (function-def ...)    ;local functions
	     (defun ...) ...))		;public functions

The problem is that it's not so flexible and general as something
like T's locales.

- -- Jeff

Jeff Dalton,                      JANET: J.Dalton@uk.ac.ed             
AI Applications Institute,        ARPA:  J.Dalton%uk.ac.ed@nss.cs.ucl.ac.uk
Edinburgh University.             UUCP:  ...!ukc!ed.ac.uk!J.Dalton

--
